so the Hebrews created history as we
know it
don't get away with anything and so you
might think you can bend the fabric of
reality and that you can treat people
instrumentally and that you can bow to
the Tyrant and violate your conscience
without cost you will pay the piper it's
going to call you out of that slavery
into Freedom even if that pulls you into
the desert
and we're going to see that there's
something else going on here that is far
more Cosmic and deeper than what you can
imagine the highest ethical Spirit to
which we're beholden is presented
precisely as that spirit that allies
itself with the cause of Freedom against
tyranny I want villains to get punished
but do you want the villains to learn
before they have to pay the ultimate
price that's such a Christian question
one of the reasons why I started working
on the equipment is like the white
cattle were being handled was horrible
you know electric prods on 100 I'm
falling down crashing into things people
screaming at them
uh cattle handling in the 80s was
terrible absolutely terrible and I I saw
that as a something I could fix now I
talked to a lot of young people today
that want to you know do activism about
some specific thing and it's way too
broad I want Justice in the world for
example right yes yes it might be
something they would say yes yes and I
say why don't you do something more
targeted like using DNA to show that
this prisoner was falsely accused you
see now that's something a lot more
targeted that you can actually do yes
absolutely and I think that is a huge
problem with the way that kids are
trained morally in universities is that
that grandiose vague activism replaces
the actual practicalities of problem
solving that you're describing that
actually make a difference
[Music]
thank you
hello everyone I'm usually excited to
have whoever I'm talking to
uh that day on my show because I pick
people I'm excited about talking to but
I'm particularly excited about my guest
today Dr Temple Grandin Temple Grandin
Revolution revolutionized the animal
handling industry over the last 40 years
and has done more for animal welfare in
a practical sense than anybody that I
know of and perhaps anybody on the
planet I think you could make a case for
that she's a remarkable person I saw her
first in Tucson Arizona I'll talk about
that a little bit in our interview she
gave one of the most compelling
presentations I'd ever seen in an
academic setting at a conference on
Consciousness and saw that about 15
years ago and ever since then I I really
been wanting to meet her and I got to do
that today so that's so exciting so I'll
just give you a brief bio and we'll pop
into the interview Dr Temple Grandin is
a professor of animal Sciences
at Colorado State University facilities
she has designed for handling livestock
are used by companies all around the
world her work has been instrumental in
implementing Animal Welfare auditing
programs now used by McDonald's Wendy's
Whole Foods and many other major
corporations
it's appeared on numerous shows across
platforms such as 2020 Larry King live
and prime time
Dr Grandin is also an accomplished
author with books such as thinking in
pictures livestock handling and
transport and the autistic brain
a few of our other Publications animals
in Translation as well as visual
thinking have even made it to the New
York Times bestseller list in 2017 Dr
Grandin was inducted into the National
Women's Hall of Fame and in 2022 she was
honored once again as a Colorado State
distinguished professor
we're going to walk through her book
today and uh
we're gonna we're gonna learn what she
has to say now about thinking
let's start with visual thinking and
language so do you want to tell people
about your realization about about
different thought patterns when I was in
my 20s I thought everybody thought in
pictures the way I thought
I didn't know that other people thought
in words until I was in my late 30s now
you've already mentioned how do I
categorize
well I'll explain as a child how I
learned to categorize categorizing with
individual pictures so I was a very
young child I categorized cats dogs and
horses by size because in our
neighborhood at that time there were no
cattle and there were no small dogs
then a dachshund came into my
neighborhood
and she's the same size as a cat
and I remember looking at the Dachshund
she was a black Dachshund and trying to
figure out now what features does she
share with the dog she barks
her nose shape is the same as a dog and
she smells like a dog
so I had to take other sensory-based
things like smell and what the dog
sounded like to put the dachshund in the
dog
category so the way I form categories is
I have to have a bunch of information
let's take the cat category
um and you look at a leopard's face a
lion's face and even a house cat's face
there's similarities
um
they and they also smell all the same
too
uh if you go to the zoo you can smell
how they are different so the first step
for abstract thinking is put making
categories
so when I finally figured out that other
people did not think in pictures
uh if I ask most people visualize your
own home your dog or your car you will
do it because you're so familiar with
that but one time in an autism
conference when I was in my late 30s I
asked a speech therapist think about a
church steeple and I was shocked that
all the only image you saw was a very
vague two lines like this where I see
specific churches they come up like a
series of well back then 35 millimeter
slides now if you PowerPoint slides and
then I can start as I see more and more
of these churches I can put them into
New England type category Stone
Cathedral type looks like a warehouse
and it has a little plastic steeple type
I'm I can make finer categories as I get
more and more specific images it's
bottom-up thinking and I learned that
that's exactly how an artificial
intelligence program diagnosis melanoma
cancer
it's given a training set of two
thousand melanomas and another training
set of every kind of skin rash and
mosquito bite and infected whatever
um and then it learns to categorize
melanoma from non-melanoma
and uh that was very insightful to me
when I learned that that's how a simple
type of artificial intelligence programs
work
diagnosing something like melanoma
so let me ask you when I'm thinking
something through now I can think in
pictures and if I'm building something
or trying to design something to build
then I tend to think in pictures but
I would say 90 of the time my proclivity
is to think in words and I would say in
part that's because
the my word thinking is so dominant it
just suppresses the image thinking and
so a lot of my thinking I would also say
takes the form of something like
internal argumentation
so I'll ask myself a question
I'll think up an answer in words and
then I'll think up a bunch of reasons
why that answer isn't sufficient and
then I'll conduct an internal argument
and that's occupying me
continually like 16 hours a day non-stop
and it's been like that ever since I was
two years old except for those times
let's say so yeah so so how how do you
do you conduct internal arguments or
like what what accounts for the
so part of the creativity in my thinking
is the outcome of these arguments but
you're thinking in pictures so you're
not having internal arguments now what's
the stream of your thought like well and
when it comes to things like designing
equipment I often will uh kind of uh a
lot of equipment design someone gets an
idea from something else and one of my
other books I wrote about the inventor
of velcro and he saw how Burdock stuck
on his clothes
uh you know cockle Burrs on those kind
of things stuck on his clothes and
that's where he got the idea for making
velcro that would be visual thinking
they burdocks and velcro they've got
similarities on how they stick together
in designing equipment I can just see
how it operates I worked with welders
that had 20 patents each that barely
graduated from high school
but they could build any kind of a
machine and invent industrial Machinery
they just see it in their head
right now will you see okay so I read
Nikolai Tesla's bar uh biography a long
while back and it was extremely
interesting and he claimed and I have no
reason to disbelieve him that
entire
um inventions machines would pop into
the theater of his imagination
detailed out to the point where he knew
the angles on the screws that held the
metal together and he would try to write
them down in in something approx draw
them out in a something approximating
something that would be you know that
you could make a blueprint out of let's
say in that much detail and sometimes a
new invention would pop into his head so
quickly that it would obliterate the
previous one he had to work very quickly
to keep up and so so there's that
incredible fluency in visualization but
then in as I said in in the verbal World
I'll think of a argument and counter
arguments when you're thinking of
industrial design do you think of
um the object that you're attempting to
design and then multiple variants of it
and test them against each other or does
it just come to you as a solution for a
given problem it almost sort of just
pops into my head I also see mechanical
abnormalities I remember walking in and
someone made a cardboard old-fashioned
locomotive you know the wheels have
those links between them and I go that's
that they drew that wrong
wheels are not going to turn
me on it was just a cartoon train for a
party
but I immediately noticed that they
didn't draw it right the other thing is
is is is my thinking associative
uh all right give me a key word pretend
I'm Google for images not something not
something I can see in here with books
and papers all around
um and photography equipment and stuff
all around me but something kind of a
creative key word and I'll tell you how
I access my memory for that keyword
start the new year off right with Black
Rifle coffee
Black Rifle has all the best Brewing
gear thermoses mugs and apparel designed
for folks who love country and coffee
Black Rifle sources the most exotic
roast from around the globe
all coffee is roasted here in the U.S by
veteran-led teams of coffee experts
every purchase you make with Black Rifle
helps support veteran and first
responder causes go to
blackriflecoffee.com and use promo code
Jordan for 10 off coffee Coffee Gear and
apparel or join the Black Rifle coffee
club for automatic deliveries to your
door on your schedule
save 10 with promo code Jordan that's
black riflecoffee.com promo code Jordan
Black Rifle coffee supporting veterans
and America's coffee
[Music]
so and with regards so my wife has a
very uh powerful visual imagination
she's able to do all sorts of uh
remarkable things with it and one of the
things that strikes me as highly
probable is that her capacity for visual
imagery is a lot more intense than mine
yes and so like I I was a fairly Vivid
dreamer for years especially when I was
reading Carl Jung's work in in graduate
school don't seem to dream much now or
not well I don't remember them much now
when I do think in pictures it's not as
Vivid as seeing the real world it's
maybe five percent of that it's it's
sort of it's it's
well it just doesn't have that intensity
um what and you and you I know it's very
very Vivid and um and while I was um
while you were setting up all the camera
equipment here I found on here's a whole
bunch of papers more papers I found
online supporting the a lot of the
things that are in the book I just got
surfing around and uh boy you can
sometimes find some great stuff when you
look at the citations no but it's very
very Vivid
I don't know if it's completely big of
it now when you mention the word
imagination
I remember going to a long time ago
Disney World a kind of a ride that had
imagination with people and derigibles
and things like that you know then I
visited a studio where they um where
Disney made a whole bunch of their stuff
I'm now seeing that yes I'm now seeing a
non-disclosure agreement so I can't tell
you what I did there
and uh right uh but I now I'm seeing a
very interesting discussion we had about
designing things
where where you're designing things
there's the decoration part of it and
then there's then there's the mechanical
part of of a machine of course at an
amusement park you want to have
decorations but you also the rides have
to mechanically work
they're kind of two separate things
they're kind of done by two separate
departments you you also spoke in your
book about
your ability to see things out of place
and so one of the things that
characterizes autism
is the fact that at least some autistic
people are not very happy
when they walk into a room say that
they're familiar with and one thing is
out of place so for example an autistic
child might walk into a dining room and
one of the chairs is you know tilted 45
degrees to the right or to the left
instead of being put straight in and
what seems to happen correct me if if
you feel that I'm wrong is that
the fact that that chair is now Askew
means that the entire room is different
in some important and emotionally
significant way so there's this in
response to anomaly I don't have that
issue that's not an issue for me but um
if there's one pixel off on an
electronic sign I will notice that
I remember one time walking into the
airport with somebody else and the
United ticket counter sign was a whole
row of Television monitors
and there must have been 20 TV monitors
making the word United over and over
again and one of the screens was
scrambled the whole screen and I
immediately saw it and I said to the
person beside me did you see that that
sign was messed up
no they did not see it and they were
right beside me when we walked in
I immediately saw it now that it upset
me no I just noticed that the sign was
scrambled right but it didn't upset you
no so yeah so so so that's that
interesting
so for me I I think I can detect
anomalies
visually so for example one of the
things I learned to do when I was
setting up my house and renovating
places and setting up my offices like
arranging my local environment was to
sit in the room and become meditative in
some sense and then to feel out
what was bothering me about the room
like what ugly feature might pop out
what what part of it needed to be
attended to right and and I think I was
tuning myself to detect what was
abnormal in relationship to the
underlying aesthetic or the pattern of
the room
but that pops out for you almost
instantaneously when when I for me
anomaly detection is mostly verbal again
is like all think up an argument and
then think up counter arguments and if
one argument and the other don't Jive if
they're contradictory then that pops out
for me
well it's sort of like I fly all the
time to like I know when the pilots do
the checklist and like we push back and
we just take too long to turn
I'm going uh oh we're gonna have it air
traffic controls away
and I can often predict that before they
announce it
and I also can I'm very conscious of um
uh on the biggest airplane when they
start the little gentle push to push it
back from the gate I can feel it on the
biggest aircraft there is
right and I and all right so now I I
just want to get over here and I'm going
oh please push back I'm
but it's sort of like I don't get upset
about it it's just um anything that's
not routine I instantly notice it and I
go oh crap I see a vest that says Tech
Ops
we may have a delayed flight
now that brings up another thing I want
to talk about in the last month I've had
okay mechanic come on a plane not twice
and both mechanics had gray hair and
this brings up a major issue that's in
my book about skill loss especially
skill loss with mechanical things I've
been on a lot of questionable elevators
and escalators lately that definitely
needed Servicing
and what's happening and this is in my
screened out chapter is the kids are
getting screened out
of these trades because they've taken
the shop classes out of the schools 20
years ago and we have so many higher
math requirements that you don't need
for something like fixing elevators
that the kids are playing video games in
the basement on an Autism diagnosis
instead of fixing elevators there's a
relationship here between what goes on
with industrial things and what's going
on at school which is a major major
thing that I'm interested in talking
about
yeah so let's talk about that a little
bit it's it that's one of the things
that popped out for me from your book so
I was trying to think think that through
so you make the claim as you just laid
out that
our education system and maybe our
entire culture as it's hypothetically
de-industrializing is actually working
against the best interests of those who
think mechanically those who think in
pictures and those who can do Hands-On
work and here's a paper I just dug off
of Google Scholar on visual
objectability a new dimension of
nonverbal intelligence and what a lot of
Educators don't understand is that
object visualization
especially on solving mechanical
problems it is a different way of
thinking I've worked with people that
barely graduated from high school
stutterers they'd be labeled autistic
today they've been special ed
but they had big metal working shops and
20 patents each for mechanically
complicated equipment that they are
selling around the world and this is
something that Educators just don't get
it
[Music]
the reason why I wrote this book I'll
tell you what was the reason in 2019
just before coven shut everything down I
went to four places and I realized the
magnitude of the skill loss
uh the first one was a pork processing
plant
where most of the equipment came from
Holland
I went to another pork processing plant
equipment coming from Holland then I
went to a poultry processing plant where
all of the specialized equipment came
from Holland 100 shipping containers and
then I went to the Steve Jobs theater
and the structural glass walls are from
Italy and Germany then after reading
more stuff I found out that the
state-of-the-art electronic chip making
machine comes from Holland
and that goes back to their educational
system they don't stick their nose up at
the high-end skilled trades and look at
it sort of like a lesser form of
intelligence when the kids get to about
ninth grade they can go University route
or they can go
Tech route and I want to emphasize
high-end skilled trades where you're
really using that visual thinking for
mechanical devices
so I was trying to think through why
this might be happening so let me offer
some hypotheses to you and you tell me
what you think about this so first of
all we have learned and you you draw on
Simon Baron Cohen where Cohen's work in
your book we have learned that there is
a difference and and we can try to map
this on to verbal thinking versus uh
imagistic thinking Simon Baron Cohen
talked about
systemizing versus empathizing and and
he considers that something akin to the
Continuum between autistic thinking and
normal thinking so the autistic types
um are more systematizing and my
suspicions are they're also the ones who
are more likely to think in images in
the manner that you describe wait a
minute
of thinking in images
and there's a nice paper that just came
out relatively recently seeing and
thinking in pictures the review of
visual information processing uh that
came out 2018 I like to keep my stuff up
to date now I think in photorealistic
picture
where the more mathematical type of
thinking thinks in patterns see in your
brain you've got circuits for what is
something okay so I see a dog and I go
yeah that's a dog or I've got a I've got
some China ceramic cattle on my coffee
table here okay and I just look at the
animals and name them
then the visual spatial is where is
something where are you located in space
there are actually two different kinds
of visualization and I have a whole
chapter in visual thinking book about
this and research to um back this up
I've now the visual spatial type pattern
thinking or sort of where is something
in space those kids do well in math so
they're going to stem right but let me
tell you what's going on out in the food
processing plants
the people I worked with in the big
steel shops now that a lot of us closed
down we are paying the price now for
taking out those shop classes on
designed mechanically clever equipment
people I worked with in me we never
worked on boilers of refrigeration we
don't understand that stuff that
requires a lot more mathematical
thinking or the load on the roof so the
factory doesn't fall down if we get two
feet of snow you see that I have seen
this division of engineering labor in
every single Meat Company I have worked
with they're all the same so do you do
you think do you think that's a matter
of uh like let's say something
approximating focal depth so is it
possible that the the first kind of
people that you talked about are deta
are dealing at the at the object level
itself so they're dealing say with a
boiler or with a particular piece of
equipment whereas the other types are
dealing with the relationship between
equipment no you don't think that's it
no I think it's just real simple it's um
you just see the objects and then after
you work you see an object visualizer
gets better and better at designing
mechanical equipment the more things you
go out and see like when I started
working my designing cattle handling
facilities I went to every feed yard in
Arizona and I worked cattle and I go
this kind of a design doesn't work this
worked so then I took all the good bits
and like recombine them it's bottom up
thinking the more stuff I get exposed to
okay whether it's cattle handling
facility or maybe I'll look at how water
flows through something and then you
watch how cattle move I'd like to look
at Drone footage and a lot of that
um resembles water flow and the and the
visual spatial
um they they see patterns it's actually
very different and what we're losing is
the object visualizer
um that person that can just you see I'm
very aware of things like I go in an
elevator now that hasn't been serviced
and it's scraping in the shaft you
better believe it right right I hear it
and I go they haven't serviced that
elevator and I was at a fancy hotel
recently and um uh the bellhop goes oh
it skips that floor we have to get that
floor on the way down
yeah real nice hotel major city
right right okay so let me I don't quite
understand that distinction yet so I'm
going to I'm going to press a little bit
more on that so on the on the on the
visual side you have the visual spatial
types uh if I if I'm remembering this
correctly and that's the category that
you fall into and then you have people
who are what are they higher up on the
abstraction chain in some sense the ones
who can think more mathematically no but
basically object visualizers I can tell
you this from experience we're good at
Mechanical Devices aren't photography I
have talked to many many photographers
because I do a lot of interviews find
out they're dyslexic they're about
flunked out of school and fortunately
somebody introduced them to photography
and the other thing that my kind of
mind's good at is animals then you're
visual spatial Mathematics Algebra I
can't do Algebra there's nothing there
to visualize mathematics calculus I took
a computer programming uh course when I
was in college I couldn't do it I had to
drop it I was exposed to the same exact
computer that Bill Gates had and he
could do it and I had to drop the class
you know they uh these are the things
that the more mathematical pattern
thinking mind is good at
and and some of these really smart kids
they can just look at algebra formulas
and just see it they don't have to do it
step by step they just and that's how
they think and then the teachers try to
make them do it step by step that gets
the kids frustrated you know they don't
think the same way right and right and
my thinking is also associative I tend
to jump around but there's a logic to
well the association and I think the
best way to illustrate that associative
kind of thinking is give me a single
keyword like on Google for images and
think up a creative keyword and I will
tell you exactly how my mind Associates
Associates and how my mind can get off
the subject but there is a logic to the
getting off of the subject
so give me a keyword a single keyword
okay how about Rose
okay I'm seeing some rose bushes that we
had in our backyard when I was a child
and uh we had a lot of thorns on them
and we also like to dig around in the
grass that was back there so now I'm
seeing the grass uh behind our house
when we used to go play in it and catch
some insects sometimes okay now you can
see how it's jumping around I don't have
that big a visual I don't have that big
a visual library of roses so then how
about cows I tend to then go to
something else
how about cows what
cows all right now I'm seeing like um
10 cow statues right here in front of me
and so obviously those are coming up in
my mind uh just recently I tend to bring
up recent memories I visited with a with
a Black Angus bull it was a pet and he
wasn't very happy with us because we
didn't bring him any carrots so my
friend gave him one of those disgusting
soy protein bars and he goes I'm not
gonna eat that I wouldn't eat it no
matter must have tried to feed it to him
and he was annoyed because we didn't
bring him any carrots uh
okay then I'm get uh now I'm on the now
I've got the carrot word in my head and
when I was in fourth grade I used my
singer so handy to sew green crepe paper
so students could be carrots and I made
the green Carrot Tops out of green crepe
paper
so that's how I got interesting so okay
carrot so talking to you talking to you
that way reminds me very much of what
used to happen in my therapy sessions
when I was helping people interpret
their dreams and so dreams have the same
quality of thought that your thought had
when you just put it on display there so
because the the dream tends to be an
intermingling so imagine there's a
center category and the nature of the
category is somewhat unclear maybe
that's partly what the dream is trying
to puzzle out but what you get is a web
of the associations some of which are
autobiographical that are sort of
circulating around a main theme and
partly what you do when you analyze the
dream is you you walk through all the
associated images you also ask the
person to let their mind loose to
generate more associations and then you
try to use the associational web to
triangulate on the central theme and and
to haul out the gist and the gist of
that array of images would be something
like the interpretation of the dream if
you get it right then it snaps into
people they think oh yes that's
definitely what that was about but the
dream is attempting to put something
together you know that that has a
central character or sensory things
because
you know I have to have some balance
issues
so I often get dreams where I'm like
riding a bike down a hill that's super
steep like that and I wish I wasn't
doing that and I know that that has to
do with the fact that I have balance
issues I don't think it means anything
but I'm always up on some high place
that I wish I wasn't up on and I've got
to try to walk down it
and then I have other dreams where I can
see it might have some meaning
and other times where it doesn't
the other thing with my thinking when
I'm working on design work I can control
the associations
I can control them I've had before on
you know there's now 3D simulations okay
let's say the company that's building us
this plant wants to show off how the
Equipment Works they can do a 3D
simulation showing how the equipment
works and I can remember sitting in a
conference room we're trying to discuss
how to do some conveyors and uh and and
the other guys there are coming up with
ideas for the conveyors I'm going no no
if you do that you're going to yank the
rails out of the ceiling oh no no no
that won't work they were almost using
my mind like a 3D CAD program
that was animated and I could test test
run in my head on these different
conveyors
men is it time to stop mindless
scrolling time to finally gain that
higher quality of life you know you're
missing out on if this sounds familiar
then on January 9th join thousands of
men all over the world to embark on a
90-day journey together in search of a
better life it's called Exodus 90 and it
was built to help men enjoy the freedom
of becoming who they were truly made to
be Exodus 90 guides you in removing the
attachments that are holding you back
from a better life and it actually works
independent research shows that Exodus
90 men report considerable shifts after
the first 90 days including stronger
satisfaction rates in their marriages
more meaningful prayer lives and
dramatic decreases in time spent on
their phones
for the past seven years Exodus has
helped more than 60 thousand men build a
road map for living with virtue in a
culture that offers far too many paths
to self-destruction
is it time for your Exodus we start
January 9th find resources to prepare
for Exodus at exodus90.com Jordan that's
exodus90.com Jordan
so so let's go back to to the issue of
of say taking shop class out of school
so Baron Cohen talked about
systematizers versus empathizers now
what Baron Collins yeah who had the
object visualizers
he was looking more at the mathematical
visualization pattern thinkers I agree
with them about systematizing and and
and verbal but he the um object
visualize but he didn't differentiate he
didn't differentiate the systematizers
properly that should be more yeah he
didn't system monetize us would have two
categories the object visualizer and the
visual spatial and a big mistake in a
lot of perceptual studies is that
they're not differentiating them and
some people
um there's some verbal people in
Psychology that don't want to believe
this stuff exists just while you were
setting up the cameras I downloaded
six new abstracts that aren't even in my
book on this
that show that they are different
right we've got them right here on my
lap
so so Cohen also talks about gender
differences in relationship to this
continuous so we can break the continue
into two parts on the one end and it is
the case that autism tends to be
preferentially a male yes disorder right
although there are females as well but
so that systematizing mode of thinking
that you've differentiated into the two
categories also tends to be gender
stereotype to some degree I avoid that
issue commercial because right now I um
I'm interested in one thing at the age
of 75 of helping the students who think
differently get into really good careers
where they can have satisfying lives
and I avoid the controversial stuff
yeah well I'm I'm not so much interested
in the controversy I'm interested in
trying to address the issue of why shop
courses for example have been taken out
of schools now we do know that the the
like schools are predominantly run by
women and women are more likely to be
empathized no I think they're less like
I think the reason why so I'm wondering
if there's a gender issue going on that
and the prejudice against a certain way
of thinking okay what's that I think
that
um one of the reason they took out the
shop classes they kind of just go Well
everybody's going to go the university
route
and costs great good shop classes cost a
lot of money now people are starting to
put shop classes back in and you know
what they're finding they can't find
anybody to teach the shop classes I just
heard about a brand new beautiful
welding shop built here in Colorado at a
community college and they can't find
somebody to teach it even after they
drop the university requirement and I
can tell you right now we need people
that do these things before the power
grid and the Water Systems fall apart
I'll tell you that stuff I care right
right right yeah well it's a okay so so
you well virtualize eight now do you
think virtualization has also played a
role in this I mean the system types
some of the 3D drawings I see a draw
and that's not gonna fix some of the
serious problems we got with
infrastructure right now and you need
both kinds of thinkers like one of the
things I've got in my book is um where a
bridge fell down in Minneapolis
and the workers were complaining they
were worried that when they were working
on the spreads it was going to collapse
well I looked up that bridge collapse
and I saw all the Twisted Metal and I
had I look took one look at that and I
went it's too light it's too cheap
that was just from looking at the
pictures then I found the engineering
report on why that bridge fell down and
they cheated on the gusset plates that
hold the the beams together and they
were way thinner than the spec
but I had already looked at the pictures
and said that bridge is too light it's
cheap
before I read any engineering report
so how was it in your life that you
attained the Practical knowledge
necessary to facilitate your thinking so
we're talking about how you gotta you
got outside in the vision I'll tell you
how you do it it's real simple you got
to get out and experience all kinds of
stuff because the more information you
put in the database the better you get
and going back to teaching a computer
how to diagnose melanoma I had to give
it like a couple of thousand melanoma
examples and a couple of thousand
mosquito bites infected boils and
everything else examples in other words
the more as I got older and I got more
and more information in my database I
could think better and better and better
and I could make smaller categories of
things now a lot of the people that I
worked with in construction that build
equipment for me that's used in every
large beef plant now in the U.S
some one of them started and they some
of them would definitely be autistic uh
one of them started out working on cars
another one took a single welding class
and now he's selling mechanical
equipment all over the world
started with a tiny shop that then grew
into a big shop and what's happening now
is
is the little shops are not forming
and that's why we're importing all this
equipment from Holland and Italy
because when you look at their
educational system and I looked it up
again recently online
in Italy actually has three routes
University route Tech route mechanical
and art route
you know like for their fashion industry
and the Holland and Netherlands you can
go either University route or Tech route
and that's why they're making the
state-of-the-art chip making machine
that we don't make
chips
right I wonder if this is also a
consequence of people increasingly
moving away from farms you know because
when you're on a farm you'd have to do a
lot of Hands-On stuff you have to do a
lot of fence repair you got to take care
of your own machinery and you know as
you move into the urban environment
everything in some sense even in the
real world is virtualized because you
can always call on other people to do
the day-to-day things that you need to
keep the infrastructure I agree a lot a
lot of um you know kids are growing up
today totally removed from the Practical
and one of the things I talk about in
the visual thinking book is
um uh uh talked to a doctor and he told
me he had trouble training interns to
sew up Cuts because the interns had
never used scissors as a young child
I had a student in my class that had
never used a tape measure to measure
anything
and they're totally removed from the
world the practical
where those kids that came off the Farms
yes they had to figure out how to fix
things absolutely
but I think what's happening now in the
schools is things are getting so verbal
and that's going absolutely crazy on
math requirements
because I know people with 20 patents
and they could basically do sixth grade
uh arithmetic that I could do because I
can relate that back to real things and
things like dude
do you know of any research pertaining
on how the more the people who who
visualize objects might be assessed for
their ability yeah
there's a whole chapter in here uh
that's and I've never pronounce their
names right blank and colva and I never
can say the names correctly but I have a
whole list of references in there where
the difference between the object
visualizer and the visual spatial is
being assessed and there's a whole bunch
of references on that now I have to look
these names up because I can't uh I
can't pronounce them correctly uh
let me find a reference list here for
chapter two
okay it's um blaz henkova I've got one
two three references in here from Blaise
hankova on types of creativity and then
the other big um reference I have lots
of references uh
would be um
cause havnikov uh if she's got
trade-offs object versus spatial
visualization reviewing the visual
verbal Dimension evidence for two types
of visualizers that's another paper
spatial versus object visualization a
new characterization of visual cognitive
style that's three papers right there
cohesnikov that are in my reference list
and okay and I've got a lot of
references where they are actual you
know tests were done
you know when I go through the citation
lists I just went in and we're working
on the children's edition of the book
right now and the one of the copy
editors had a query about a reference
and I I had to look that up and then and
then I decided to just type in uh object
visualizer and visual spatial uh into
Google Scholar again and find the same
old papers and then I found some
citations it's kind of a cool paper here
in the journal cognition
uh it's an old paper actually visual
object ability a new dimension of
non-verbal intelligence I know from
working in factories I spent 25 years in
heavy construction and that is something
that I don't think many teachers have
done that and seen how these guys think
big complicated Cargill plants ibp
plants which are now Tyson Monfort
plants and that company is now JBS
um figuring out complicated things with
equipment it's a different type of
intelligence
and I think it's uh I when I worked on
the book with Betsy Lerner my super
verbal co-writer who helped me organize
things and she had someone come in to
fix a bunch of stuff in her house
and after we had discussed this Betsy
was telling me well I watched how he
figured out how to fix the the stones on
the chimney I had never really thought
about it before but she'd watched how he
did things and then she started to
understand there's a form of
intelligence there that's absolutely not
verbal when she watched a person she
hired to fix stuff in her house
right right yeah well you can imagine
something and this did pop into my mind
visually can imagine somebody who's
trying to put together a stone chimney
has to rotate that way to make sure that
they're going like a Tetris game that's
a good way of thinking about it I was
thinking then again because I'm thinking
in images now that we're talking I was
thinking about my young grandson he was
he's only two years old he had his Legos
played lace laid out in front of him and
when I was a kid I played a lot with
Legos and I played a fair bit with this
meccano set that that was like a junior
engineering set and it was certainly the
case that working with Legos was
non-verbal because you're rotating
shapes in space and having them fit into
one another towards some design end and
that's a nice kind of Hands-On
um Hands-On learning and and exposure to
different mechanical principles and so
do you have recommendations for people
who want to help their children uh train
their their visual spatial and object
visualization abilities let's get them
out building things the big mistake I
see with a lot of kids is they're super
good with Legos they don't think to
introduce tools I was using tools myself
right I was not using a saw but I was
using hammered screwdriver and pliers I
was taught how to use it safely I've got
another book of children's projects
called calling all mines where I
describe bird kites that I spent hours
with tinkering to get them to work on
to agree with parachutes to get them to
open up more easily
kids aren't aren't
kids today are totally separated in the
world of physical things
I'm they're not getting out and
observing stuff out in nature
you know this this is part of the
problem and and um I just went to a
veterinary school where the students are
so far removed from practical things
that to give them dexterity skills and
surgical skills they have these plastic
tote boxes and they put children's
puzzles inside them and they've got to
just reach in and by feel but these
children's puzzles together
because when they were in kindergarten
they never did this
right right right yeah well my my
parents told me that when I was four my
favorite toy was a screwdriver and that
I used to take all the cupboard doors
off the cupboards in the kitchens and so
I was introduced to tools at a very
early age and that there's a real
practical utility in that too because
now if I visualize a project in my house
shelving or something like that or any
or any uh construction project of any
sort well I can visualize the array of
tools that's necessary to make that come
about and then I have the tools at hand
and I know how to use them it's and and
and and that is a well it it's also I
really find that kind of work calming
and and and engrossing
we'll be back in one moment first we
wanted to give you a sneak peek at
Jordan's new documentary logos and
literacy
I was very much struck by how the
translation of the biblical writings
jump started the development of literacy
across the entire world
the pastor's home was the first school
and every morning it would begin with
singing the Christian faith is a singing
religion probably 80 percent of
scripture memorization today exists only
because of what is sung
amazing here we have a Gutenberg Bible
printed on the Press of Johann gooper
science and religion are opposing forces
in the world but historically that has
not been the case now the book is
available to everyone from Shakespeare
to modern education and medicine and
science to to civilization itself it is
the most influential book in all history
and hopefully people can walk away with
at least a sense of that
well the problem is is we got kids
growing up today totally removed from
the world of the Practical they don't
use tools they don't use scissors
I had a student in a class who had never
used a ruler or tape measure to measure
anything ever
I think that's a problem
because if you haven't done practical
things uh then you don't understand how
to fix things okay like two years ago
they had the horrible mess with the
power you know like a bunch of different
Power stations froze
well I never heard so much abstract
gobbledygook about that because the way
I would work on fixing it would be all
right let's look at each Power Station
what piece of equipment actually froze
I never saw anything written in the
press to described okay what Frozen this
plan what Frozen this plant because my
inclination would be to kind of rank
them on okay a turbine Hall that froze I
can build a building over it that's an
easy one you know a whole bunch of gas
Wells froze that's going to be like
really difficult to fix but you see
nothing's abstract
because okay if I'm going to try to
figure out how to fix it
I I don't really want to argue who owns
some I'm not interested in politics I
would just rank the power stations on
expensiveness and difficulty to
winterize and say exactly right piece of
equipment froze and you know how I can
find out you let me loose in there away
from the managers I'll find the
maintenance shop they'll show me
everything and I know enough about
equipment that they can't BS me
right so maybe part of the advantage to
that more visual form of processing is
also its association with that kind of
practical particularization I mean one
of the things
on the other hand I have no idea how to
balance a power grid that's a job for
the mathematicians you see this is where
we need to work together
and and in a complementary factor in a
complementary way and I tell people in
big corporations I've done a lot of
talks for businesses your first step is
that you've got to um recognize
different kinds of thinking exists
and and let's let's take another example
recently I visited two really nice
dairies up in Quebec Canada that have
the robotic milking machines where the
cow can go in she decides one she wants
to get milk and get fed and both dairies
it actually made some good mechanical
modifications on that equipment which
the equipment company uh finally adopted
but one of the Dairy Producers said to
me I stop at the computer stuff I don't
mess with the program
that's somebody else's job to work on
the software but the mechanical parts of
the device they figured out ways to
improve it
yeah it's like a it's like a hierarchy
man you can imagine a hierarchy of
generalization with the highest
resolution lowest level being the
particulars of a given machine and you
can imagine people
might specialize to operate at different
levels of the hierarchy maybe the verbal
types are operating at the highest well
that's right they they are but they lose
that particularization that's right
that's basically right because the
verbalizer tends to over generalize one
of the papers that I reviewed in my book
on visual thinking was an interesting
study where um high school students that
came live for school specializing in the
Arts another school specializing in the
sciences and another one especially in
the humanities which would be more
verbal on those teams of students and
their assignment was to create a new
planet
so the art students heavily visualizing
they made a planet with uh crystals on
it another one made a skyscraper planet
and then the more mathematical science
students just painted around made a
round ball and described gravity and the
atmosphere you know kind of boring
pictures and the verbal thinkers started
to write it down and then they go oh
wait a minute we're supposed to draw the
planet so they made kind of splotchy
stuff on it but the thing that was
interesting is that the Arts Minds more
my kind of mind and the mathematical
minds they had big planning sessions on
how to design their planet where the
verbal thinkers and they didn't do any
planning you see this is the problem the
verbal thing will get big broad Concepts
or something we need to do right but how
do you actually Implement those Concepts
yeah right there's no detail there now
in food safety we have a a thing that I
really like it's called Hazard analysis
critical control points so let's say I'm
out there in a sea of of things I can do
well I can't do all that stuff see now
the critical control Point let's say in
food safety in a food factory I can't
measure microbes and bacteria on
everything in that plant
I have to pick out the places where I'm
most likely to have contamination
that would be the critical control
points
on one of our men's doorknobs
yeah that's why some places food
factories have automatic doors because
that gets rid of touching the door
yeah well one of one of the things that
I always found uh a relief in working
with Engineers is that they were good
and I can see it in the terms that
you're describing they were very good at
rank ordering practical priorities right
and that that seems to be part of this
particularization so I have this company
it's a software company that sells uh
personality tests and uh and writing
programs for people to help them plan
their lives and my business partners and
engineer and although he's also very
intelligent verbally he's more
intelligent non-verbally and he knows
these systems right from the from the
code Upward at every level of their
machine instantiation and so the huge
advantage to that is that if anything
ever goes wrong he knows exactly what
goes wrong and he knows exactly how to
fix it it's particularized down to the
point where that makes action possible
eh and that's part of the problem with
uh with the verbal abstraction is that
it makes sense conceptually but that
doesn't mean that it's detailed to the
point where it's actually implementable
and then it it's like a pseudo knowledge
right because it sounds
like you've got the picture right but
when you actually try to implement it
you find out that that it's really a
hollow a hollow shell of
conceptualization well I kind of look at
like um this is why when I learned about
the food safety concept of Hazard
analysis critical control points or
let's just call it critical control
points so I've got a big sea of stuff
out there what's the really important
thing okay now I I only think a specific
examples so let's take Frozen Texas
power stations the critical control
point is and I want it like in two
sentences what right piece of equipment
folks
and then you can very easily figure out
the ones that'll be easy to winterize
and I've actually talked to somebody who
installs gas Wells and it only costs
five thousand dollars to winterize a
well when you build it to retrofits a
complete mess he also said you have to
have someone who knows how to turn the
valves he said that's me right on the I
call them the guy in the pickup and that
person in that pickup truck is not
getting enough credit he knows how to
turn those valves right
yeah so if you conceptualize that
verbally you end up saying something
like a bad winter storm took out the
Texas power grid and that sort of sounds
like you've said something but it's
nothing like saying well the grid is
made out of 200 different uh like
industrial assemblies each of those is
made up of a variety of parts that's
differentially susceptible to Winter all
right well that's still gobbledygook
because first of all it wouldn't have
200 separate power stations
you know it's more like 10 something
like that and and
I would just listen we'll write down the
name of the station because I don't
really care who owns it and what we used
to do with meat packing plants when we
were doing welfare audits is we'd always
call them by their Town names
because you're auditing that particular
plant and I said well this um Power
Station had a frozen turbine Hall that's
an easy one to fix
um there's a coal-fired that froze well
as they freeze up the where you have a
cold bumps in that's probably from
really easy to fix and if um you know 50
gas Wells froze up the feed of plant
that's going to be a mess to fix
um
but you see as I talk about these things
I see it and I happen to know what some
of the equipment looks like you see that
also makes me a better troubleshooter
you know if I know what stuff looks like
you see this is where you've got to put
things in my database
but I but I worked 25 years out in
factories on heavy construction stuff
so I know what a lot of stuff looks like
right so so it means in some sense that
to solve the problem is you take the
verbal representation so the verbal
representation is a storm took out the
Texas power grid and then you say well
there's 10 key components to that that's
okay power grid so that differentiates
that and then you say in each of the 10
systems there are critically vulnerable
points that are specifically sensitive
to cold weather we need to differentiate
and find out what those key ones are
then we have to differentiate that
further you see now okay now when I
first started my work there was no
Google Earth
well the first thing I do probably
Google Earth and street view of the
power stations
and the other thing I've learned if I
want to get accurate information I don't
you don't talk to the managers you got
to get down in the shop
and and then the shop guys have to be
not worried about getting fired
that's another right right nasty issue
that I'm going to have to deal with
but you know let's say I get three shop
guys together and we've okay my industry
said when we get rid of all the suits
you know that's going to be the banner
right the verbal thinkers they won't
talk in front of suits they're afraid
they're going to lose their jobs
you know and this is something I know
from all the years I've worked in this
stuff and then they'll take you out
there and show you what froze
and then oh there's creative things I
talked to a guy who works at a power
plant and there was this one sensor very
important electronic sensor and it'd get
cold and when it got cold he put plastic
garbage bags over it
and I'm going right well I think we need
to have something a little more
permanent to keep that sensor warm than
black plastic garbage bags that's what I
told them
yeah so so that that issue that the the
guys with the Hands-On knowledge have to
worry about being fired is interesting
too because it seems like so they have
this extremely detailed knowledge that
that's practical about how these systems
operate and what happens is if they
bring that knowledge up the abstraction
hierarchy what they're doing in some
sense is is pointing out the manner in
which their superiors they're
hypothetical well that's the problem
a very big problem I've had
is um I they're they're worried about
losing their jobs yeah and and but you
really want to solve the problem they
need to be able to talk to you freely
because they're the ones who tell you
exactly what froze
right well the question is why would
their attempts to bring their practical
reality to bear as they move information
up the information hierarchy why would
that threaten people to the point where
they would be intimidated in
relationship to their job I mean why is
there this Gap this psychological gap
between the Practical and the abstract I
mean you'd think that the managers would
be calling on these people all the time
you got to drag those suits out of the
office too just when things are working
normally
and I'm
so they get a better uh understanding of
what the Practical people are doing now
my Animal Welfare work on one of the
things where I made some of the biggest
difference in Animal Welfare work is
auditing programs I helped develop with
McDonald's Wendy's and Burger King back
over 20 years ago
and in this situation we were taking
vice president level managers out to the
plant
and they'd have these Undercover Boss
moments just like that show I'll never
forget the day when the McDonald's vice
president saw a half dead dairy cow go
into their product and he goes yeah we
got some things here we have to fix you
see before it was all an abstraction
spreadsheets numbers okay Animal Welfare
give it to lawyers give it to the public
relations department but when they came
out of the office and they saw something
bad now it was real now they had to act
it was no longer abstract anymore
there seems to be a kind of pride in
that abstraction in some sense I mean
I've also noticed that highly
intellectual people and maybe those are
ones who think primarily in words tend
to be rather dismissive of the
intelligence of more practical people
like working people and that's I Come
From A working class environment so
although I've hung around verbal people
most of my life so I can see that
dichotomy do you have any sense of why
it is that the more abstract thinkers
are have a well they have a potential
practical because they used to say okay
the kids that are like failing High
School stupid kids go and Shop
well I can tell you right now right
exactly I worked big metal fabrication
companies owned by these so-called
stupid people and what they they were
inventing equipment they had 20 patents
and they were very proud of their
patents and one of them made posters out
of them put them up all over his place
um it's a different kind of intelligence
and and uh it's not you know there's
things they can do the verbal thinkers
can't do and what I what I'm really
interested in is we need all the
different kinds of Minds because one of
the problems with my kind of thinker
since I'm associative is the point in a
company let's say I had a metal
fabrication shop I'd have to hire a
verbal thinker just to run the business
the payroll ordering materials things
all of that part of it
do you think it's a competition do you
think it's a competition for status
between different forms of
neurodiversity I mean if I can claim
that my intelligence is Paramount that
that increases my social status in some
sense right you can imagine there's a
competition for that broadly going on in
society what I have found is when you
got the verbal thinkers out in the field
their eyes got opened
that the important thing is
um you got to drag the suits out of the
office
I've done a whole lot of that and let me
tell you they changed
okay I've done a lot of work on Supply
Chain management
and when their supply chain disasters
like a factory burning up and a clothing
industry's disgusting industry they need
to clean up a lot of stuff uh Factory
burns up a hundred uh people selling
blue jeans
well the suits didn't get out of the
office and see what was going on in
these factories
until there was a disaster the one they
should have been preventing a disaster
like that
right well yeah so once you build up
hierarchical organizations it's very
easy for the people who are operating
near the top of the abstraction chain
not to pay attention to the details and
hopefully the details are working out so
well that you don't have to pay
attention to them I mean that's in some
sense the point of building a
hierarchical organization but but what
you need to do obviously the manager
can't be you know doing every job out
there in a plant but they need to have
enough contact with the field and I'm
going to use the field be like the
factory floor farming you know uh Water
Works any of these kind of things so
they they um understand the difference
they can be things bad going on but I
tell business managers and I've talked
to many big corporations computer
companies steel companies
um pharmaceutical companies that the
first step is realizing that different
kinds of thinking exist and that they
can work together in complementary ways
and you actually you need the whole team
you need the whole team because we're
kind of disorganized and associational
um I'm gonna need a verbal thinker if I
got a really big business to um
you know keep the business going
so what do you think what do you think
of the suppositions and you talk about
them a bit in your book that the visual
versus verbal
modes of cognition map to some degree
onto hemispheric specialization well
that the right is more oriented towards
your kind the right hemisphere is more
oriented broadly speaking towards
probably speaking broadly it dominates
your mind yeah but broadly speaking
that's true you know they're except
they're exceptions to some of that that
stuff done the thing that I want to talk
about is is right now I'm seeing too
many kids that are dyslexic autistic
um or whatever I I'm ending up playing
video games on on a disability check
when they could be photographers well I
got four person crew here right now
doing this um filming
and that's an interesting career or they
could be designing mechanical equipment
and they never get an opportunity to do
photography art or mechanical equipment
stupid kids
right right okay so there's a
privileging of this semantic and that's
partly because it's cheaper it's easier
it's detached from the world in some
sense how do you think we should
redesign
schools for say kindergarten kids and
elementary kids in some practical way
you tend to think practically what do
you what do you think would be good
start
well like in the 50s when I went to
school we had all kinds of craft
projects I was learning to use little
blunt scissors probably in first grade
uh I'd be putting all the Hands-On
classes back into schools and that's
going to include theater music cooking
sewing when I went to elementary school
I loved art sewing and Woodworking and
if I hadn't had those classes I would
have hated elementary school and I loved
sewing
and I'm when I was in fourth grade I had
a singer so handy a toy sewing machine
that actually sewed and it was one of my
favorite things because I could make
things with it
kids are not doing enough of that kind
of stuff today
right okay so there's a return to the
there's there's a need for a return to
the Practical on in some sense on both
sides of the gender spectrum of
everybody
and I would now I went when I was doing
a book signing for visual thinking I
went to um uh a physics lab in Harvard
this room's labeled physics lab and they
had all kinds of 3D printers on there
but they also had a sewing machine and
they also had a station for crocheting
this is the building labeled engineering
department at Harvard maybe they're
realizing they've got to get them doing
some Hands-On things this is when I did
the book signing for this it was part of
the book tour the other thing I've
noticed I stayed I got into some
interesting places I stayed at this
hotel where
um where they so in Evansville Illinois
where they had uh textbooks in the rooms
from the 1930s I wish I'd had more time
to look at it and I pulled out an
electrical engineering book
and it had a lot of math on it but it
was much more applied they'd say well
this is how this the generator works
this is the math that goes with it but
it would describe how the generator
actually worked
it was much more applied
and I now the physiology book that I had
in the 70s you know we'll explain how
the kidney Works how the heart works and
then explain the chemistry now I look at
a physiology book and it's much more
verbal a lot more math and chemistry but
how does the kidney actually work
I still have my old Duke's physiology of
domestic animals from 1970 and I want to
go back and compare that to the Duke's
physiology now and and it's like we're
taking the Practical out I just got an
email yesterday uh from the UK that they
wanted to take a technology and design
course out of a high school
you see I think this what's happening
now is mathematics is totally taking
over yes we need mathematics
because my kind of mind is not going to
touch boilers and Refrigeration in that
food processing plant that's a job for
the mathematicians but what we're losing
is the object visualizer
right right right yeah well I wonder
I wonder too if part of this is the fact
that you know for a long time in our
society a lot of this practical
Machinery just worked and so we could
afford to ignore it in some abstract
sense right because our cars worked and
our power grids worked and we could take
all of this low-level infrastructure for
granted now that meant there were a lot
of people on the shop floors who were
busily working making sure it worked but
it did mean that we had the luxury to
engage in abstract specialization and
maybe we could fall prey to the
psychological tendency to just dismiss
all that
well you see when they first started
about 20 years ago is when they started
taking shop classes out of the schools
well you can get away with that for a
while and then the people I worked with
I'm gray now
are retiring
they're retiring out and they're not
getting replaced that's happening with
elevator and escalator mechanics that's
happening with airplane mechanics
and I'm seeing that more and more and
more and more as I travel these are free
things that I see all the time and they
are getting gray
right right
so yeah the retirement problem is going
to be the retirement problem
when it comes to Industry there's two
gigantic mistakes that were made
shutting down in-house engineering shops
20 years ago we had a huge metal working
shop called the Montfort Fab shop
and it was part of the engineering of a
company called Montfort so no longer
exists now well that's been shut down
and then at the same time we took out
shop classes now in the short run it was
cheaper for these companies to just Farm
out engineering work they needed to do
in their plan yeah that works fine until
the shops retire out
and now what's happened like I can't go
in the net give you the name of the
company but I have a client right now
where the one shop that's left is
ripping people off at five times the
price
and that's happening right
do you see any positive consequences of
computer technology for object
visualizers and for the for the people
who are working more in the visual
spatial end of things well it's
definitely useful to you know like the
visualization of stuff you can do on
computers
but that doesn't replace real things let
me tell you power grid I lay awake at
night about that and that's so fragile
that I'm not I'm not going to go into
any detail because it's too fragile
and I'm not going to discuss the things
that I visualize and lay awake at night
about the power grid
because it's just okay fragile um
okay I'm curious about that why not
discuss them because I don't want to
give them I don't want to give people
that have bad intentions any information
on how to hurt the power grid okay okay
I see yeah that's the reason
right because it's very easy and I don't
want to give out any information that
would help somebody damage the power
Bridge so I don't discuss the details
here but I'm seeing them right now
right right right yeah well that's part
of that ability to think about critical
points of failure
engineering mind I know where the
critical points of failure are and I'm
not going to discuss them
right right so we can all be thankful
that you're not a terrorist
yeah I'll be thankful I'm not a criminal
yes exactly exactly yeah well I've
always often been afraid when thinking
along the same lines that you're
describing of just exactly how fragile
things are in that regard and how much
someone with a good imagination how much
damage they could do if they targeted
things properly
it is really quite frightening to
apprehend well that's why there's
certain things about the power grid I am
not going to discuss and I'm seeing
three big fat critical control points
right now I'm seeing them in my mind and
they make me crunch
right so so can we talk a little bit
about the specifics of your work I
remember one of the stories you told at
this Tucson conference was about you you
talked about cows that they would do
such things as go into a field and look
at a if you look left a briefcase on the
field for example the cows would
eventually come and look at it that's
right a cow's in a in a line might be
stopped by something like a coke bottle
in their path and so you used your
ability to think like animals to design
systems for animal handling that were
much more Humane so can you walk us
through that a little bit well the first
work I did with cattle was in the 70s in
Arizona uh when I didn't even know that
I had was a visual thinker and other
people were not a visual thinker and I
noticed that if there was a coat hung on
the fence the cattle would stop
um if there was a shadow or reflection
off a vehicle so I got down in the
shoots to see what they were saying and
I would take pictures down inside the
Chute and people thought that was kind
of crazy but now I'm I'm like right just
recently did a startup in a really big
plant and at 10 o'clock in the morning
everything's working fine and then at
three o'clock in the afternoon a big
Shadow appeared I called the spider
monster
and it was just a shadow and these
cattle decided they weren't going to
walk over that so they'll have to build
a roof over the facility so that the
cattle can't see the spider Monster uh
the other thing I'm I show I show people
how to do is what's your lead animal
your lead animal will come up and stop
and look at the thing they don't like
the same plant on the night shift okay
the shadow monster wouldn't be there
they either the guy calls me and he goes
they go halfway up the shoot and stop
all right what do I do I said now bring
up a nice calm bunch of cattle Watch
Your Leader really carefully he'll look
right at the thing he doesn't like
and the LED light on the corner of a
building and they took that down
and then everything worked fine
how do you identify the leader
well there's always a leader when when
all right let's say I take a 20 head of
cattle out of a pan
there's a lead animal that walks out
first
usually one of the more bold animals not
the dominant animal the dominant animal
that pushes the others away from the
feed trough he's in the middle of the
herd where she's in the middle of the
herd but the leader will come out of the
pen first and the other cat will follow
and it's just the first animal and the
group's the leader it's that simple you
see as we were talking about that I'm
seeing it
okay so so is that leader stable across
instances of leadership and is that
associated with this ability to find
what's anomalous and to deal with well
the in cattle that have lived together
for a while tend to stay in the same
order you know years ago when your tags
came out that were sequentially numbered
in other words you could just buy a
package of ear tags labeled one through
two hundred
and they put them on their cattle and
one of the things that surprise ranchers
when maybe 200 cattle came back the
following year to go through the shoots
to get vaccinated and they were coming
through in almost the same order
now that's a group of people live
together
okay is there something okay so you made
the observation that the lead animal
will stop and look at the thing that he
doesn't like and so are the other
animals and but also that lead animal
wasn't the physically dominant animal
he's got some other characteristics the
animal is dominant at the pushing others
away from the water trough or the feed
trough but the but once the lead animal
walks the other cattle usually will
follow same thing with shape the other
animals will usually fall right so you
remove the distractions that the lead
animals reacting to and and at this
particular plant we had two things we
had to get rid of we had to get rid of
the spider monster Shadow and we had to
get rid of an LED light that was on the
corner of a building
so do you have any sense on of why the
other animals come to rely on the lead
animal like what's the lead animal being
selected for or is it just a first mover
well what's the number of this lead
animal you see there's different levels
of fear in animals genetically some
animals are more bold other animals are
more shy or you can call those high and
low fear and the animal that's more bold
is more likely to be the leader
than the animal that's more anxious
um and and uh
it only down with a bunch of cattle have
lived together all the time you know
that there'll be certain animals that
tend to be the leaders and then you've
got the great big one with the giant
horns and she shoves everybody else away
from the feed trough there's something
that's very profound about that because
you're laying out the fact that it isn't
the dominant animal that leads no and
that it's the animal that's exploratory
and that's right somewhat willing to
take risks that that's right but also
absolutely also that that the lead
animal will spot anomaly right like the
spider monster that you're describing
and so it's not like they're they're so
bold that they're completely without
fear they're still acting cautiously in
some sense all right so you can walk the
lead animal down a chute and you can see
what it's going to see and you can
actually do that because you go down
there and do it but you also think that
way you gotta bring your cat up really
calmly to see because if you bring them
up at a run then the leader just turns
back and you don't know what it's
reacting to oh yeah I said to him now
bring them up nice and calm watch the
leader come up the Chute and when he
stops he'll look right at the thing he
doesn't like and he looked at the LED
light light on the corner of the
building then they texted me a picture
of it and they got rid of that
and that fixed the problem
now have you have you have you developed
some sort of picture of the class of
things that stop cats yes
okay so tell me what sort of thing I
want him to stop cattle I have pictures
I have checklists of things to look for
Reflections on water at this particular
plant there was a gate handle a gate
handle that jiggled and it was right by
the shoot entrance I said that needs to
be fixed so this gate handle doesn't
vibrate
so what's common do you
do what's common about the things that
stop cattle in their tracks or or can
you extract out well let's look at let's
look at cattle's a prey species animal
so you're looking for things that might
be a danger some little little bits of
Rapid movement set them off
and and something that sort of like
shouldn't be there like you can put a
white plastic bottle in the entrance of
the Chute now about shut a meat plant
down
I they'll just keep turning back away
from it turning back away from
them right so they're looking for
something that doesn't fit the
environment that's right pattern and
that's probably doing something like
activating Predator detection well
that's right it's like that you know
they they're looking for stuff that uh
you know a movement in the bushes maybe
that's a mountain lion or a wolf
some little movement in the bushes
the other thing about new experiences if
you take something like camera equipment
cattle love camera equipment you put an
expensive camera in the middle of the
pasture they will come up and knock it
over and lick it to that
that's what they will do see things that
are novel are attractive when the animal
can voluntarily approach and scary if
you suddenly shove it in their face you
suddenly shove it in their face then
it's scary
right and so that's right that's a
introduce new things to cattle is to let
them voluntarily approach it I don't
know how many times people say to me my
horse was fine at home he went crazy at
the show
well you've got a lot of Novel stuff
they're like flags for example
so you better get your horse used to
Flags before you go there and the best
way to get them used to Flags would be
to decorate the pasture with flags and
let your animal walk up and voluntarily
approach them right right well you know
that's exactly what you do in
Psychotherapy when you're trying to help
people overcome a phobia right so if
someone's afraid of an elevator and
won't get in it that often happens with
agrophobia what you do is you say to
them okay
um let's start by imagining elevators so
that's going to make you a bit nervous
but imagine an elevator at some distance
that doesn't make you uncomfortable okay
okay and then you say okay well now
you've done that see if you can move
yourself in your mind closer to the
elevator door
and then you keep doing that but it has
to be voluntary it's 100 absolutely
necessary for it to be okay so maybe you
run them through this imaginal exposure
therapy and then you say okay for our
next session what we're going to do is
we're going to go out in the hallway you
know that elevator you wouldn't take
we're going to go out the hallway we're
going to stand 200 feet away from the
elevator and you're just going to look
at it if you can
and so they'll do that has to be
voluntary and then you can get them 150
feet away and 100 feet away and soon
they'll be right up to the elevator door
I was very anxious uh as you know in my
20s and I got terrified of airplanes
because I was an extremely scary
emergency landing when I was a senior in
high school they put the slides down and
the whole thing very very scary and one
of the ways I got over that is I had to
make Aviation interesting and when I got
the ride in the cockpit of a plane
flying uh hosting heifers to Puerto Rico
uh that made it interesting you make
something scary interesting
because I know another thing they do on
the elevator phobias is they show them
how the safety mechanisms work that the
elevator is not going to fall down the
shaft
yeah well you you know you even compel
that interest to some degree so for
example one once you get a phobic person
inside an elevator
what they'll tend to do is look at their
feet
and so you say to them look quit looking
at your feet look at each corner of the
elevator look at all the numbers look at
the display panel like you have to
facilitate their voluntary visual
exploration okay and to some degree what
you're doing is you're calling out their
interest to say attend to all of these
things as if they're interesting and
then that's how they familiarize
themselves with the elevator and they
also note that well they're in there
because you have to look at the elevator
to know you're in an elevator right
literally you have to move your eyes and
point at all the different parts of the
elevator and the more that you can help
people do that at a high level of
detailed resolution voluntarily the more
likely they are not not only to become
less afraid of the elevator is that that
actually isn't what happens is you
actually train them in a form of
exploratory bravery because what you
teach them is that if they use their
eyes voluntarily to scan what they're
afraid of they'll become braver and then
that generalizes to all sorts of other
instances too so if you train someone to
be less afraid of an elevator they're
much less afraid of other things as well
that's right and the thing that we're
seeing I'm saying right now in dogs you
know we have very strict leash laws here
and there's more problems with dogs
being afraid of the veterinarian because
they haven't been out experiencing
enough stuff like strange people
touching them for example just going to
lots of different places you know this
is the reason why when they train
service dog puppies you take them
everywhere so that there's almost
nothing that will frighten them
yes yeah well that that that's the same
argument you were making earlier about
the fact that to train people
practically we have to put them in a lot
of different practical Hands-On
situations and so that they can
generalize across all those instances
and so experience that's too narrow is
too is too restrictive well I get
worried that we're going to have people
making policy on all kinds of important
stuff
um when they're so far removed from the
world of the practical
you see we need to have both because all
the problem with us practical people is
we're not organized enough that's where
just about every tech company has to
hire a suit eventually
just to keep the company organized
somebody's got to pay the payroll
somebody's got to pay the taxes somebody
has to make sure the rent is paid
you know if they need more office space
then they've got to go out and go
shopping for Office Space
you know there there's uh well and we
really do need all the different kinds
of Minds
well when I look at the ideological
solutions that are being put forward to
the world's problems continually I do
wonder the same thing you're wondering
about which is is this empty ideological
representation a consequence of the fact
that the people who are doing this have
no practical experience at all it's like
they're not thinking at the level of
detail well I think that what it's a
problem because when I worked originally
this is over 20 years ago with
McDonald's Burger King and Wendy's and
they took the top managers out into the
field and implemented the auditing
program it was interesting to see how
the Animal Welfare issue went from an
abstraction give it to Legal give it to
public relations to Something Real that
they really needed to address
you know half dead animals going into
your products not okay right right right
um right a broken stunning equipment is
totally terrible and not okay and that's
mainly a management problem and failure
to do maintenance
and and I'm and and when I worked on
that in 1999 I got five journal articles
published on this on I saw more change
than I'd seen in in in my whole career
when these big companies were inspecting
these plants but I figured out a very
simple scoring system if you couldn't
shoot 95 of those cattle dead on the
first shot you failed a McDonald's on it
it was that simple some very simple
critical control points if you had more
than three percent of your cattle Bella
running their heads off when you're
handling them you failed the McDonald's
on it okay so why why why did that turn
out to be the critical issue Well they
um broken stunners were a big issue now
on the handling I figured out a way to
score that that's very simple
vocalization if you're poking cattle
with too many electric prods or you're
slamming doors on them or whatever
they're going to be Bella running their
heads off
and I better not hear any bellerin
coming out of the place where they kill
them well I hear bellerin coming out of
there somebody needs to get kicked off
the approved supplier list it's that
simple
that's one of the critical controls
right so you used so you used animal
distress as an indication of that's
right efficiency of process okay can you
can you walk us through some of your
designs I mean you designed these these
circular
um cattle enclosures as well to to calm
them down the circular designs are
really nice but I'm also very proud of
the fact there were 75 plants on the
McDonald's approved supplier list only
three had to buy fancy spent expensive
equipment everybody else we fixed with
management yeah three managers had to be
removed I call that managerectomy
on a lot of non-slip flooring had to go
in because one of the things we measure
is slipping and falling
and lighting cattle are scared of the
dark
um training people to move smaller
groups of animals
and and uh put a solid side up so they
don't see the vehicles passing by and
these very simple changes we were able
to fix some of the older places I'm very
I used all my design ability to figure
out how to make some of the older
facilities work even though they did not
have the fancy new equipment
and then we had three clients only three
plants had to do a front-end remodel
that was very very expensive that's
three out of 75. I'm really proud of
that oh yeah that's all a big pork
plants in the U.S
right so so tell me tell me tell me what
your goals were okay so let's walk this
through at the level of detail so why
don't you tell people about how these
cattle handling plants work broadly
speaking from from the time the cattle
arrived till the time they're processed
let's say and then how are you brought
in to fix them well
unloading a truck make sure you have a
non-slip unloading ramp open the gates
up let them out you do not need to
scream at them pound on the vehicle or
stick electric prods into the holes in
the side of the truck so let the cattle
just get off and they will and then they
should walk quietly out of the truck if
they go to scale weigh them on the scale
and then quietly walk into a holding pen
and get a drink of water maybe a lay
down then when it's time to go up to the
plant somebody should come down bring a
group of 20 out not a group of 50.
and you quietly walk them up the alley
to where they get to where the round
crowd pen is
and the whole thing should be in a calm
walk
without slipping and falling and without
moving and bellering and
and almost no electric prods
that and it should all be very calm
walking is what it should be
right and and how many plants did you go
analyze
we there we we had 75 plants on the on
the approved supplier list and um only
three of them had to have extensive
Renovations but we did have three plants
where the plant manager had to be
removed
right and so in those cases yeah why did
you remove the managers
well the ones were able to get rid of
the plant managers were the corporate
ones uh the plant then we had one plant
that we used to call the problem child
and management was family and we
couldn't get rid of it and that plant
would like you know fail an audit and
then pass an audit and ah
but management has to decide that
they're going to do things right you can
have the best equipment
and it's not going to work if it's not
managed in fact before we started these
audits I had a lot of equipment out in
the field lots of equipment half my
clients tore it up and wrecked it and
one of the what the customer
inspections and audits did is force the
plant to manage the stuff they had
either brand new fancy stuff or older
stuff
and so how broadly did your Innovation
spread and how rapidly and what were the
consequences of that for the meat
handling industry in general well the
auditing program was within six months
as the year of 1999 was adopted by
McDonald's Wendy's in Burger King
and that covers just about all the big
beef plants and I saw more Improvement
than I'd seen on a 25-year career prior
to that
people were no longer using broken
equipment
they were moving smaller groups of
animals
uh things were kept repaired and um and
employees were better supervised and boy
it made a big difference
so why do you think you were able to do
this I mean you obviously can solve the
problem practically but how are you able
to
um make your way in the corporate world
in a manner that actually resulted a in
people listening to you and B and
changes actually being made because
that's that's quite a remarkable
combination of unlikely achievements all
right let's start off I started out with
equipment this was in my 20s and I found
that selling equipment was much easier
than getting people to manage equipment
correctly and early in my career I made
the mistake that a lot of young
engineers make I thought I could make a
self-managing cattle handling facility
that is yes
and I got a lot of systems out there the
other thing that helped me to get
systems out into the industry is I wrote
about them and I wrote about them in the
meat industry and cattle industry trade
press
wrote all kinds of Articles just about
how to do it so now I had a lot of
equipment out there
Center track restrainer and lots and
lots of these big plants had one it's a
piece of equipment I developed with the
guys in the shops that I've talked to
you about earlier
but half my clients tore it up and
wrecked it then I worked with a lady
named Janet Riley at the American Media
Institute and I came up with this very
very simple
scoring system for evaluating meat
packing plants and we wrote it up in our
guidelines nobody used it for two years
then
McDonald's approached me to implement
their Animal Welfare auditing program
and it started out taking vice president
level managers out of the office they
saw some bad stuff
and it started out as little training
program they already had food safety
Auditors in the plants auditing them
that was already being done
and so I took them trained the food
safety Auditors to do the Animal Welfare
audit
and within six months I saw more change
than I had seen in my whole career prior
to that then Wendy's got on board then
Burger King got on board and I made sure
that everybody used the exact same score
so it was absolutely clear it was like
right rules you know you know they
measure speeding we measured how many
vocalizations a cattle did we measured
how many animals fell down those things
were measured
and the plants had to make certain
numbers it was absolutely clear there
were five critical control points and
they had to do all five of them to pass
the audit I kind of sometimes can't
believe I pulled it off it worked me on
my wildest dreams
but it was absolutely practical
right right yeah well it did it is it is
quite a remarkable thing to pull off to
to be able to make that kind of change
in the corporate world so quickly that's
that's really quite remarkable the other
reason I was able to make change I I
practiced reverse conflict of interest I
had a lot of expensive equipment already
out in the plants I've been over
backwards in the older facilities to
figure out how to make that older
facility work without buying expensive
equipment let me tell you non-slip
flooring it can work wonders yeah we did
quite a lot of that right right but
that's not that's not expensive
equipment
and I'm really proud of the fact that I
took some of the older facilities and we
made them work and then we did have
three only three out of 75 plants they
had to build an expensive front-end
Remodel and that was very expensive
so what would you say if if you had to
put it into a few phrases
you you weren't obviously pursuing mere
narrow profit at that time not that
there's anything wrong with profit you
you were serving some other goal I was
serving the goal of improving animal
welfare and I've been over backwards to
do reverse conflict of interest
and I tried to take some of those older
facilities right some of them a bit
shabby and make them work with simple
changes like repairs non-sup flooring
changing the lighting and free Plants
had to have the plant manager removed
the problem so why why were you cons why
were you so concerned with animal
welfare and how would you define Animal
Welfare why did that become Paramount in
your in your hierarchy of goals
well one of the reasons why I started
working on the equipment is like the way
cattle were being handled was horrible
you know electric products on 100 I'm
falling down crashing into things people
screaming at them uh cattle handling in
the 80s was terrible absolutely terrible
and I I saw that as a something that I
could fix now I talked to a lot of young
people today that want to you know do
activism about some specific thing and
it's way too broad I want Justice in the
world for example right yes yes it might
be something they would say yes yes and
I say why don't you do something more
targeted like using DNA to show that
this prisoner was falsely accused you
see now that's something a lot more
targeted that you can actually do yes
absolutely and I think that is a huge
problem with the way that kids are
trained morally in universities is that
that grandiose vague activism replaces
the actual practicalities of problem
solving that you're describing that
actually make a difference why do you
think it was that animal suffering stood
out for you is it is it partly because
you you can think like animals like what
why do you think well you would how
would you like to get shocked to
electric prods and be slipping and
falling and crashing into fences and
things like that you'd be terrified wide
I'm
and
my goal was to improve how the cattle
were treated when I talked to students
about you know activism I said what I
worked on wasn't everything bad
happening to animals
I worked on something targeted the thing
that I'm seeing now with young people
that want to make a difference they say
I want to have Justice in the world or I
want to like animals are treated
terrible we got to do something about it
and I'm saying you're going to be more
effective if you pick out something
relatively targeted I've worked on
cattle handling to start with that's not
everything to do with animals
yes exactly or the example of using DNA
to show that this criminal was innocent
that's something much more doable and
targeted that you can actually do
right so how was it that the suffering
of animals in meat Trucking and meat
packing plants came to your attention to
begin with so you said the suffering you
found that unbearable first of all it
started out when I went out to the feed
yards handling cattle back in the 70s
there's a lot of really horrible cattle
handling
and I I made a mistake in the beginning
that a lot of young engineers make they
think technology can solve all their
problems and I mistakenly believed that
I could build a self-managing cattle
handling facility that's nonsense I know
that now that's nonsense
good equipment makes good handling
better but it doesn't replace management
and what the auditing program did is it
forced people to manage the facilities
and why why were you at the cattle
handling facilities to begin with I mean
was this part of your academic training
or was this part of the fact that you
had grown up on a farm well I got
interested in after going out to my
aunt's Ranch and this brings up the
other things students get interested in
stuff they get exposed to
it's that simple in in one of the people
I profiled in visual thinking with
Michelangelo
grubby little 12 year old dropped out of
school
but he was running around all the
churches seeing great art
and he grew up with stone cutting tools
okay that's the exposure then he started
making some stuff and then an artist
took him in as an apprentice that's
mentoring
good careers start first with exposure
and the other reason why I'm so
concerned about taking all the Hands-On
stuff out of the schools is those things
like let's say theater for example
expose students
I didn't care about being in the play
but I loved making scenery and costumes
that I loved doing now that's something
that can become a career
so let me we're running out of time on
this segment let me ask you one more
question and then maybe I'll sum up our
discussion for everybody or try to
extract out the gist you think primarily
in pictures but you're also an extremely
effective verbal Communicator I mean
you've written a number of books you can
obviously talk your way into corporate
environments and help people walk
through the complex process of
restructuring say animal handling on a
pretty much on a national scale how did
you how do you think you've been able to
develop your verbal ability like what
what did you do to manage that all right
it goes back to when I was seven years
old in my neighborhood all the kids when
they were seven when the parents had a
party you had to put your good clothes
on greet the guests and serve the snacks
be little hosts and hostesses that's
what you had to do
um I sold candy for charity that helped
me on talking to people the other thing
I figured out very early on is back
doors into jobs and most people don't
see this in the HBO movie Temple Run
Brandon there's a scene where I go up to
the editor of our state farm magazine
and I get his card because I know if I
wrote for that magazine that would help
my career
that's a back door writing I did a lot
of writing this how to handle cattle how
to design facilities
and I was so happy when one of my very
early articles got picked up by two
other magazines
you know it had made the national scene
of course this is all you know
pre-internet and then that press pass
got me into all kinds of meetings that
helped me to get into my next self-made
internship with a swift plant
I recognized the back doors most people
don't recognize the back doors but lots
of good jobs are gotten through the back
door
right so you Allied your ability to
concentrate on focal details practically
with the ability and the willingness to
communicate on at all sorts of different
levels verbally you're able to bring
that's getting too abstract for me I
just go okay I got the card within a
week I may have done a master's thesis
on cattle behavior in different types of
squeeze shoots and I I sent them a good
article and they published it then I
went back to it and said maybe I could
just write something for you every month
I just walked into the office and asked
that job so I did that as a volunteer
for about three or four months and then
they started paying me
I wasn't shy to walk up and ask
right right so so you developed a
communication communication expertise
and a communication Network at the same
time that you were trying to implement
your practical Solutions and both of
those facilitated Each Other Well in the
very beginning I wasn't even designing
facilities and then I I was um just
visiting all these feed yards and
writing for the magazine and that press
pass got me into all kinds of places
I recognize the value of that press pass
it got me into meetings in the 70s with
600 registration fees
I was no way I could have afforded that
this is seven right right
so what what are you working on now you
finished this this new book that came
out in 2022 what are you doing now
well I'm very interested in seeing the
kids who think differently get into good
careers
and that's going to be a major emphasis
of the things that I do now be a lot of
speaking engagements a lot of you know
interviews like this because I want to
see those kids that are different get
into good jobs okay if they're visual
object visualizer Like Me Maybe an art
job maybe photography job or a job
building things if they're the more
mathematical visual spatial a good
programming job a good um uh mathematics
or chemistry job
where you need the mathematics there's
too many kids that think differently
um some of them are just kind of going
nowhere I want to see them get into good
careers and do things that will be
constructive in the world
do something constructive
so we're we're going to switch over to
the additional half an hour that I
produced for the daily wire plus
platform to delve into some of the
biographical details of your life
um before we close I'd like to just sort
of Wander Over the territory that we've
covered and see if there's anything else
see if you think this is a reasonable
summary and if there's anything else you
want to add I've been talking with Dr
Temple Grandin today who's who's
developed a spectacular career in
modifying animal handling and also
managed a lot on the more purely
intellectual front as well in terms of
conceptualization of information
processing she's uh we talked a lot
today about the difference in in in in
the ways that people think concentrating
mostly on the distinction between visual
thinkers who tend to be more practical
and detail-oriented and who are can be
broadly differentiated into two
categories and those would be object
visualizers and people who think more
Visual spatially and mathematically
contrasting them with people who think
more verbally we talked a fair bit about
the prioritization of more verbal and
abstract thinking at the cost of this
practical thinking and training in that
practical thinking we discussed how
that's affected the school system and
broader culture we discussed the dangers
that poses to the Integrity of our
society as we lose the people who have
the Hands-On knowledge we talked about
the psychological danger that poses to
people who think more practically
concretely and Visually who are in
school systems that are optimized for
the verbal thinkers we talked about
temples
um
career at the detail level
um ameliorating The Suffering of animals
that across the like nationally and
internationally as it turned out partly
because she decided not to chase mere
generalities but to focus on an actual
problem which was the suffering of
actual animals in actual plants was
willing to focus her
um emotional concerns on something that
was practical and to marry that with a
strategy that involved particularization
and visualization and verbal
communication and practical interactions
with corporations and also we closed
that with a discussion of the fact that
what she's doing now is trying to bring
to people's attention in podcasts like
this the fact that we seem to be
um working contrary to our own best
interests by not
uh building educational facilities that
help optimize the ability of visual
thinkers to function but also for
Society more broadly to take advantage
of the talents and skills of those
people in the
in Innovation and in the maintenance of
the infrastructure that we already have
around us and so I think that about
summarizes what we talked about today is
there anything you want to add to that
that definitely you know kind of um kind
of summarizes that we need all the
different kinds of minds and they can
when we understand that different people
think differently they can work in teams
where they can collaborate and have
complementary skills I think that's
that's uh something that's really
important
also right right the thing I want to one
thing I would do with the schools is I'd
put a lot of the Hands-On classes back
in like art sewing Woodworking Shop
welding auto mechanics theater because
these are all things that expose kids to
to things that can become possible
careers too
right and those are all things that have
to be done they're in an embodied sense
you actually have to it's not purely
abstract any any oh it's not abstract
and you are none of those things are
abstract
yeah well that's I suppose a danger of
moving so much education online as well
is that it's going to increase the
degree well that's right
when I went to the this book signing for
visual thinking I told you about the
electrical engineering book in the 30s I
found in this unique hotel room but I
also got put in the office of a
professor in political science and I
looked at some of those books and it was
so abstract theories about politics I I
didn't even understand it it had nothing
to do with right or left it had to do
with just abstractions that were so
abstract it made no sense to me and I'm
going oh I wouldn't want this person in
charge of figuring out what happened
with the power of grid
you know I remember at this Tucson
conference where I first saw you speak
after you spoke very practical talk very
much like the one that you you delivered
today when we were talking a philosophy
student got up because there were a lot
of abstract thinkers that this
Consciousness conference and asked you
something extremely abstract and
philosophical and you did exactly what I
would expect a good engineer to do which
was to say you know I really don't
understand anything that you just said I
don't know how to associate it with
anything practical and I'm completely
unable to answer your question which I
thought was just it was ridiculously
comical and I also thought
um what would you say well targeted
because it was the case that you know
you had been talking about real
practical realities your ability to
think like an animal the fact that you
had taken these practical steps to
ameliorate animals suffering and that
that had been so consequential and and
so of obvious worth and then you were
faced with this flight into abstraction
and and did what Engineers always did do
which is something like well yeah but I
don't understand that what does it mean
practically which is a really good
question that you know it's a question
that should be asked of abstract
thinkers all the time what are the
devils in the details here that you're
overlooking
how much do you know about the systems
that you're abstractly representing and
the answer to that is usually almost
nothing
well it's sort of like you know we need
all the three different base you know
different kinds of Minds you need the
object visualizers you'll go to get the
Arts mechanical and photography and
animals you need the visual spatial
mathematicians computer programmers
chemists things that require mathematics
and we need the verbal thinkers uh
because uh they're going to help
organize things you see you you need
yeah all three different kinds of minds
and they should work together in a
complementary fashion
all right well that's a good place to
end this segment I would say I'm going
to go thank to thank you to everyone on
YouTube and the associated podcast for
your time and attention I hope you found
this discussion interesting and engaging
um and practically useful as well I'm
going to switch switch over to the data
wire plus platform and I'm going to talk
to Dr Temple Grandin a little bit more
on the biographical and I want to lay
out how her her interest in the issues
that she did pursue professionally made
themselves manifest in her life
hello everyone I would encourage you to
continue listening to my conversation
with my guest on dailywireplus.com